but to everyone who's dealing with this
confusion these challenges I feel it my
family feels that just like you we're
all trying to make sense of a new
reality what I'm gonna try and do every
time I give you an update is tell you
the blunt truth and I'm trying to do
very hard to make sure I tell you what
we exactly know and when we're not sure
about something we need to be clear
about that too it would be a mistake to
tell you something certain if we're not
certain it would be a mistake to hold
back things that you need to know and it
certainly would be a mistake to
sugarcoat this very very painful reality
I think New Yorkers want real talk I
think New Yorkers like it straight and
we're going to do that so I'll be
talking about several things today that
are really painful and troubling and I
want everyone to understand that I am
NOT here to give you false reassurance I
have a lot of things I'll say that
should cause you to be confident about
what we can do in this city confident
particularly in the fact that we have
the finest health care institutions the
finest doctors and nurses and all the
people work in our health care
facilities the lab techs everyone who
works in our facilities this is there's
literally no place on earth with a
stronger and better health care sector
than New York City
nowhere on earth and we are going to ask
of our colleagues in health care so much
in these coming weeks
they are already heroes but they're
going to have to work in battlefield
conditions their strength their courage
their resilience are all going to be
needed we're all going to be depending
on them just like we depend every day
not only their work but on our first
responders and so many of our public
servants everyone is going to be needed
everyone needs to answer the call
everyone needs to step up for the good
of everyone else
but as despite my tremendous confidence
in our people and our ability to serve
them I also have to be very clear about
the extent of this crisis it is unlike
anything we have seen
outside of wartime with the possible
exception of the Great Depression itself
it we can make obvious and powerful
painful parallels even to things like
9/11 the days and weeks after that but
this crisis is even more unknown in many
ways because we don't understand the
exact trajectory we're on and we know it
will reach very deep into our
communities that is not a reason to be
hopeless by any stretch because remember
every single piece of evidence we have
continues to tell us that this is a
disease that for eighty percent of those
infected will have very little impact so
I want people to think about this I'll
tell you a lot of things that are tough
and sobering but I want you also
remember this side of the equation there
will be many New Yorkers who never get
this disease and there will be many New
Yorkers who get this disease
approximately 80% who get it and will
feel very little and experienced very
little but those 20% who experience a
much tougher time with this disease the
people in particular who are older and
that means particularly folks over 50
and especially over 70 and it means
those of course with those serious
pre-existing conditions we talk about so
often lung disease heart disease
diabetes cancer and compromised immune
system for those people particularly
they're over 50 we're worried and we
need them to take extraordinary measures
we need you to take extraordinary
measures if you're in that category of
people we need you to live differently
and we need your families to adjust as
well you're going to hear from dr.
Barbeau in a few minutes and she's going
to talk to you as the city's doctor and
give advice directly to New Yorkers in
light of a ever growing crisis but I
heard from a friend in Brooklyn from the
Midwood community just yesterday and he
said something I thought really captured
it and he said in a very tight-knit
extended family over decades and decades
it would have been unimaginable
keep his older parents away from their
grandchildren they said now he
understands because of coronavirus his
older parents who have vulnerabilities
of their own they have to understand
this is not the time to visit with their
grandchildren because we just can't run
that risk it's time for getting on the
phone to your loved ones it's time for
getting on FaceTime but it's time to
make adjustments that wouldn't have been
imaginable in other situations because
we've never dealt with this situation
before this is literally unlike anything
we have seen in our memory it will not
be the same as the 1918 flu epidemic
because for one thing the healthcare
capacity of this city of this nation are
tremendously better Public Health
ability the information flow it's night
and day
compared to 100 years ago but in terms
of the extent that's the only other
parallel we can make in terms of recent
health care history it's going to be
epidemic a pandemic that reaches deep
into our communities we got to be honest
about that we got to make more changes
in the way we live we gotta do things we
wouldn't normally do I also want to
emphasize this is a crisis that has an
endpoint as I said it will play out in
unpredictable ways and they'll play out
for a period of time and that's what
makes it different from some other
things we've been through it will go on
for months but it will not go on forever
at some point in the coming months this
crisis will start to abate and we'll be
able to start the work of getting our
lives back to normal and getting our
city back to all the things about it
that we love so much but it will be
months so it will be a long battle I
don't think it serves anyone to be told
get ready for something easy I think it
is much better to tell people get ready
for something difficult than something
that'll go on for a long time but also
have confidence that we can get through
it and that's what I truly believe the
numbers I'll go over with you today are
nothing short of staggering but they are
not just numbers
I'll tell you statistics that I have
trouble even conceiving of myself but I
don't want you to think of them as
statistics I want you to think of them
as your fellow New Yorkers every number
means another person has been affected
by this disease another family and
that's what I feel watching a crisis
that is really really affecting the
lives or our people and putting a lot of
people in danger so I'll tell you the
honest truth and I'll go out of my way
in the weeks ahead to always level with
you but I'll also tell you what we can
do and that's a lot and I will be very
honest about what we need our federal
government to do because I have to be
clear with you we alone even if we're
the greatest city in the world and we
are we alone cannot solve this crisis
and I need people to hear that not to
create fear but to level with people in
the next few weeks with the
extraordinary resources of New York City
we will fight this battle no matter what
but as we get into April the farther we
get into April the more we will need the
help of the federal government it must
arrive in time and there is time for
that help to arrive well the federal
government does not do all in its power
immediately it's as simple as this there
will be a lot more people who get sick
who didn't need to get sick and there
will be people who died or didn't need
to die it's as simple as that
so we need to act now and I know our
federal government has the capacity we
have the finest military in the world
the largest by far extraordinary
resources
unlike the city or the state and I
always say it very bluntly the federal
government literally prints money they
can create any credit line they want to
save the lives of Americans but we are
not seeing that
not even close at this point so I'll go
into some very specific information now
and then you'll hear from doc
Barbeau and then we'll open up to
questions from the media and we'll be
doing all this remotely it's the first
time we're doing it I want to just say
to all my colleagues in the media we'll
try and get it right but it may be a
little difficult the first time but
please bear with us as we try and
perfect this new system this is
something we'll be having to do for
quite a while to keep everyone safe I've
given you a framework to think about
this situation with and I'll be updating
you regularly but again it will not be
all bad news it often will be tough
information to hear but not all this bad
because in the middle of this fight we
have the extraordinary heart and soul
and spirit of New Yorkers and here's an
example for you just on Tuesday I put
out a call to retired health care
workers and those who work in private
health care offices to come forward and
join up to serve in the fight against
coronavirus I ask people who have
already given so much of their lives to
others to step forward and come out of
retirement ask people who are earning a
living and are not obligated to join
public service I asked them to join
nonetheless in the name of all New
Yorkers that was Tuesday today Thursday
as of today 1746 health care
professionals have stepped forward to
augment the ranks of those already
serving at the front line in our
hospitals and clinics that's something
all New Yorkers should be very very
proud of and I am certain those numbers
will grow this is gonna be one of the
most difficult moments in New York City
history I ask everyone who has health
care training and who can help us to
please step forward now and anyone who's
willing to volunteer please go to NYC
gov slash help now NYC NYC dot-gov slash
help now NYC h ELP n OU w NYC I want
express my tremendous gratitude on
behalf 8.6 million New Yorkers to all of
you who have come forward
and are ready to serve to protect all of
us and what you are seeing from those
retired health care workers and those
private sector health care workers
you're seeing in many other ways the
extraordinary efforts of our colleagues
in our public hospitals and clinics and
all those that the voluntary hospitals
who are already doing so much our first
responders the envy of the nation all
that they are doing to protect us our
social service workers who are helping
people through all of the challenges
they're confronting now our sanitation
workers who are doing absolutely crucial
work to keep the city clean while we
encounter a healthcare crisis on Monday
I talked about a very valiant noble
group of workers school cleaners and
custodians and food service workers who
went to school to make sure kids had
meals even though school was not in
session those workers showed up at their
posts to help our children have enough
food to eat I want to thank our school
safety agents and food service managers
including members of Teamsters Local 237
who have answered the call stood up to
help our children and those families who
need food I want to thank our school
crossing guards who have been protecting
our children who went to get food we're
gonna keep talking from now on about all
those who are standing up unafraid
willing to fight willing to help others
and I say unafraid that's not to say
they're not human beings they're not
worried like the rest of us but I say
unafraid because they showed up they
stood up they did the right thing to
help others and I thank all of you for
that
again all I ask of our federal
government is to be as good as the
people of the United States of America
look at these every day New Yorkers that
I've mentioned to you and these are just
the health care professionals and the
public service workers who are all at
their posts doing what is needed there
are thousands of stories every day in
New Yorkers helping each other out I've
called on New Yorkers to
help the people in your lives your
family your neighbors those you worship
with the folks that live on your block
or in your building who might be
disabled might have a serious health
condition or seniors who can't get
around so well to help them out help
them with their groceries help them get
the medicines they need we've been
getting wonderful stories from all over
the city
New Yorkers stepping up making things
happen right there where the need is
greatest there's so many people helping
each other right now again I'm just
asking our federal government to do its
job help all of us and that's eventually
gonna be this whole country it's New
York City today it's places like Seattle
but we certainly saw what happened in
Westchester County we see other places
developing around the country but make
no mistake it'll eventually be
everywhere so our federal government
needs to right now go where the need is
greatest and there is no place where the
need is greatest in New York State and
New York City of course I am heartened
that the Congress passed an initial
relief bill but initial is the key word
it is a small beginning far from what we
need I never look a gift horse in the
mouth but I can say with assurance that
the first step taken by the Congress
it's just a small first step and we need
a huge stimulus and relief bill
immediately that puts money back in the
pockets of people who have lost so much
helps local governments to keep going
and doing the work we do and really
responds the reality on the ground
particularly in providing health care
for so many people so quickly right now
the United States government is not even
close to where it needs to be but I do
thank the house and the Senate for the
action they took I am very thankful to
the United States military for sending
the ship that we've all been waiting for
the USNS comfort which is a 1,000 bed
floating hospital and will be crucial to
our efforts in this city and state to
protect people the military as I've said
I have no doubt in my mind stands ready
to do all necessary to
help their fellow Americans I just wish
they would get the order and they have
not gotten that order President Trump I
will only say to the president I don't
understand and I think there are
millions and tens of millions of
Americans who don't understand what you
are doing right now you are not using
the tools of your office this is one of
the greatest emergencies our nation has
faced in generations every tool must be
brought to bear for some reason you
continue to hesitate I said it not to be
flipped but to note the historical
parallel President Trump right now you
are the Herbert Hoover of your
generation you are watching and waiting
and missing every chance to be bold and
to act to protect our nation Herbert
Hoover's successor Franklin Delano
Roosevelt determined that our nation
needed urgent and immediate action and
created the New Deal and transformed the
effort to help our people and saved our
country literally the President Trump is
not doing that now for reasons that are
absolutely inexplicable to the vast
majority of us but there's still time
not much but there's still time
the president yesterday invoked the
defense production act I have no idea
why the president waited until March
18th to invoked the defense production
Act which has been used repeatedly in
recent decades seems to me given what we
knew about this crisis given that the
city of New York held his first press
conference to announce our steps on
coronavirus on January 24th I think the
president could have invoked the defense
production act in February or even
January but he's finally done it and we
know the history that that authorization
allows for massive actions by the
federal government to ensure that
companies are producing needed goods and
that they get to where they are needed
most however the president has not
ordered any of those subsequent actions
and this must change immediately through
the defense production act the president
could authorize Department of Health and
Human Services to order manufacturers to
provide materials and services and to
use their private facilities for
manufacturing needed items that has not
happened we have not seen the order from
the president ensuring maximum 24/7
production of all items needed by our
health care industry and I would say it
very plainly every factory in America
that can be converted to health care
production to the equipment and supplies
that our valiant health care
professionals need and they will need
even more in the coming months every
such factory should be ordered on a full
production basis on level prioritized by
the federal government and then those
goods must be distributed and it cannot
be distributed in a business-as-usual
manner because as I said here in New
York City
we are two weeks or three weeks away
from running out of the supplies we need
most for our hospitals the only way
those supplies can be provided in time
is through the full mobilization of the
United States military at this point
there has never been a greater
no-brainer in the history of the
Republic how on earth is the finest
military on earth being left on the
sidelines that's what's happening right
now and I guarantee you go interview our
generals and our brave men and women who
serve in the military go interview the
average American soldier and ask them if
they stand ready to get the supplies
needed to New York City and the other
parts of this nation that are in such
danger right now I guarantee you 201
they would tell you that is exactly why
they are part of our armed forces and
they would not only await the order they
would welcome the order but that order
has not been given by our
commander-in-chief and it is beyond
comprehension it is immoral
our president has not ordered our
military to full mobilization because
this is the great threat to our nation
we have armed forces overseas who are
protecting us against terrorism and
foreign threats but right now we have a
domestic threat on a level we have never
seen in decades our military is the only
answer at this point and if we expect
those goods that are produced that we
need for our hospitals to get there in
time
there's only one organization that can
guarantee that and that is the United
States military when will President
Trump
give the order that is my question when
will he give the order
why is he hesitating people are
suffering now and they will be suffering
so much more in the month of April and
the president gives himself an a-grade
and he congratulate himself and yet he
will not act in the way we need it most
this is patently unacceptable our
military also in addition to their
extraordinary logistical capacity our
military has the ability to bring
exceptional medical personnel directly
to where the need is greatest our health
care leadership here in the city has
made clear that supplies and medical
equipment are a deep concern physical
capacity to build out an extraordinary
amount of new health care abilities and
beds is crucial but the single most
important factor is personnel we're
going to need all the people I've spoken
about previously to do all they can do
but they can't do it alone in our
military our extraordinary trained
professionals used to dealing with the
most difficult circumstances and yet
they are at their bases right now all
over this country they are not at the
front the front is here in New York City
let's be very clear this is a different
kind of war and the front is right here
in New York City
on earth are some of the finest medical
professionals in this nation who served
this nation why have they not been
activated and sent to New York City and
New York State and California and
Washington State where they could be
helping right now we need them we need
everything the military can bring to
bear
I've sent two letters this week and I'll
be sending many more trying to get
action and letters are just a way of
making a hundred percent clear what
we're talking about this letter to
Secretary Alex azar Secretary of Health
and Human Services and Secretary Robert
Wilkie Department of Veterans Affairs
this lays out very clearly our request
that the Veterans Administration
facilities in this city all available
beds all available medical personnel in
our Veterans Administration facilities
be activated immediately to serve in the
cause of fighting the corona virus we
know for a fact that our Veterans
Administration facilities have excess
capacity and we know we're in the middle
of a national crisis I know again that
the medical personnalities facilities
stand ready to help but they need the
order from these two secretaries so they
can provide maximum support to New York
City and the same would be true
everywhere in the country I sent this
letter to secretary azar of HHS
delineating the supply requests again
and this is one of many requests we have
made but I'm doing it very publicly
we'll put this online for everyone to
see here are the supplies that must be
provided to New York City early in April
for us to ensure that our health care
system public and private can bear the
brunt of the coronavirus crisis and
serve our people we need three million
n95 masks we need 50 million surgical
masks we need 15,000 ventilators
25 million each of the following items
of personal protective equipment which
are healthcare workers and first
responders would use depending on the
situation
surgical gowns coveralls gloves face
masks we need these in great numbers
they may sound like daunting numbers at
first but given the extraordinary
production capacity of this country they
are very much achievable if our nation
has put on a war footing and our
president uses the powers he already has
to coordinate and to prioritize through
the private sector the production we
need that's the kind of level of
production we need those specific
supplies we need to ensure that health
care in New York City can continue on
the level we need to fight this crisis
our senator our senior senator chuck
schumer has put forth a powerful idea he
calls it a new marshall plan that's a
marshall plan for our hospitals and i
give them credit for this because he's
using one of the great examples in
American history the Marshall Plan after
World War two which rebuilt literally
rebuilt the European continent that had
been left in ruins after the war and
re-established a thriving economy the
Marshall Plan the original Marshall Plan
made the United States the envy of the
world and created tremendous gratitude
for our nation all over the globe and
that was a time when we had a lot less
technology and many disadvantages just
having come out of war ourselves senator
Schumer's right that's the right
attitude it's the right approach a
Marshall Plan for our hospitals for the
entire nation would involve massive new
investments to support state and local
governments that already are doing so
much to fight coronavirus and that are
struggling with the challenge in so many
ways to strengthen and build out our
healthcare workforce
it would involve major investments in
our strategic national stockpile and our
Centers for Disease Control and it would
allow for the large-scale infrastructure
we need to fight this extended war so I
want to thank Senator Schumer and I ask
all the members of House and Senate to
include Senator Schumer's plan in the
upcoming legislation you pass now to the
part of this update that I hate to give
but I need to about the overall
situation and I will say we will attempt
to give New Yorkers constant updates
including ones we wish we didn't have to
give and anyone who needs an update can
go to nyc.gov slash coronavirus anyone
needs specific information I has
specific needs of course can also call
3-1-1 we are seeing an explosion in the
number of cases here in New York City
now I will be clear that part of that is
that we finally have more extensive
testing going on we have nowhere near
the amount of testing that we should
ideally have we have nowhere near the
amount of testing we should have had
weeks and weeks ago to get ahead of this
crisis nowhere near the amount of
testing that a place like South Korea
had and they were able to use testing as
a powerful part of a strategy to beat
back the coronavirus we're still far
from where we should be but we have a
lot more testing than we used to have
and so it is natural as you have more
testing you will see numbers grow simply
because the larger reality is being
captured more effectively but this
number is nonetheless very very painful
and I'll tell you that the city of New
York will be every day at 10 a.m. and
again at 6 p.m. putting together our
numbers and providing updates as we are
ready once they are confirmed so based
on the update from 10:00 a.m. today
which is different from the state's
update which came from last night at
midnight
so this is again a different number than
the state that the state had for the
city different number because it is ten
hours difference and this will show you
how fast this crisis is growing at this
point in New York City based on a 10
a.m. number 3615 confirmed cases of the
corona virus in New York City again each
of those a human being and a family
represented and that number is
undoubtedly gone up since 10 a.m. it's a
painful distressing number I also have
to report another even more painful
number there have been 22 deaths now in
New York City directly related to corona
virus the breakout by borough in Queens
980 cases in Manhattan 976 cases in
Brooklyn 1030 cases in the Bronx 463
cases in Staten Island 165 cases I'm
gonna go through some specific issues
before I turn to dr. Barbeau and I'll go
quick here unfortunately we can report
that we have the first instance of
inmate on Rikers Island testing positive
the inmate is individual is early 30s
and thankfully at this moment
health-wise is doing okay is in
isolation and has been moved to our
communicable disease unit on Rikers
Island part of the health care apparatus
on Rikers Island this inmate was in a
housing unit with other inmates all have
been checked for symptoms eight have
been identified with symptoms and moved
also to isolation in the communicable
disease unit question came up several
times last few days about those
incarcerated and if there were instances
where anyone should be released because
of particular health vulnerabilities and
because there
put them at low risk of reoffending or
being any kind of threat at this point
this is an ongoing effort it will keep
growing as we review more cases the
cases are being reviewed by the NYPD and
the mayor's office of criminal justice
and as they reach agreement on an
individual case we start the process to
release them 40 inmates 40 inmates have
been put on the list we are awaiting
sign-off depending on the case from the
relevant district attorney and/or the
state of New York and we intend to begin
releases as early as today once we have
that sign-off and we will continue
reviewing other cases an update on
testing availability as we said a few
days ago the health and hospital system
has greatly increased its testing
capacity there are now ten new sites at
hospitals and these sites will have the
ability to serve approximately 150
people per day 8 again I'm going to
emphasize throughout I know we're gonna
get this question constantly and we'll
keep reiterating on a priority basis on
a reservation basis until we have much
much greater testing capacity everything
must be focused on those and greatest
need and everything will be done our
reservation basis people walk up our
drive up without a reservation cannot be
tested we have to keep the priorities
tight here but we are keep we keep
working every day to try and expand the
amount of testing to reach as far as we
can the 10 sites again will serve 150
people per day approximately initially
again in every case we'll look to
increase the numbers as much as we can
eight are already open at Bellevue
Elmhurst Harlem Jacobi Kings Lincoln
Woodhull and Queens hospitals two will
open next week at Coney Island and
Jacobi
there are seven new sites at Gotham
clinics each can serve and test 50 to 75
people per day all will be open this
week and they include Bell vus
Cumberland East New York gue venir
Morrisania Sidon ham and Vanderbilt for
new testing centers each will serve and
test 100 people per day approximately
two are open at Coney Island and Jacobi
- coming up shortly at Kings County and
Queen's Hospital this is all separate
from the state operated drive-through
testing center in Staten Island and
separate from the five new testing
centers that are coming soon in
coordination with FEMA that will be set
up in New York City we'll have details
on that as they get solidified all
appointment-only all prioritizing the
sickest and most vulnerable remembering
that 80% of all coronavirus cases will
be mild thank God for those who have
them again if you are younger than 50
and you don't have a pre-existing
condition those are exactly the people
who are coming through overwhelmingly
pretty well through this challenge and
we want those people especially if you
get sick to stay home and wait three or
four days to see if your symptoms get
better or worse only if they get worse
do you call the doctor at that point in
terms of our businesses I want to thank
all the restaurant owners bar owners
cafe owners all the people work there
you've been put through so much these
last days I'm sorry for that but this
was something I had to be done for the
good of the people in New York City but
there have been so many great instances
of people who own these establishments
working with the new rules keeping those
takeout and delivery options going
trying to take care of their workers and
we understand what a strain that is
understand there have been real layoffs
and it's very very sad but thank you for
everything you're trying to do to keep
getting people food who need it and keep
your businesses alive to the best of
your ability I want to note for all
those who doubted the ability of New
Yorkers to deal with this new dynamic
over the last few days we have sent out
the NYPD the FDNY Department of
Buildings in the sheriff's office to
enforce to ensure that restaurants and
bars that serve food were closing at the
appropriate hour that they were not
allowing customers to dine in we have
seen overwhelming compliance by those
who own and work in these establishments
there have been as of yesterday I
believe this number is 8150 inspections
that yielded only six violations that's
about as close to perfect as it gets in
human life and I really want to thank
everyone and thank these inspectors who
are doing such important work to ensure
everyone say by avoiding the social
distancing that goes with what we used
to know is social life only a few days
ago that helping people not continue the
habits we used to have that
unfortunately only led to the spread of
this disease these inspectors are doing
such important work I want to thank them
all on telecommuting state issued new
guidance which I approve of a hundred
percent taking a 75% the number of
workers who should be out of their
offices even for those businesses that
continue in their physical locations we
are working with the state on a proper
enforcement mechanism to everyone if you
still are not yet telecommuting you must
it's as simple as that
and we need every employer to understand
that and any employee who still has to
go to a worksite and he is not an
essential employee please if you have a
idea of how you could tell a commute or
some alternative talk to employer we
need people to be creative here anyone
who believes that there's a problem at
their worksite that can be addressed
call 3-1-1 and we will try and help
our department of consumer worker
protection or our Commission on Human
Rights can step in if someone is being
kept at a worksite who does not need to
be in as a non-essential worker we want
to make sure that employers really get
the message that everyone needs to be
home who can be home and as to the city
workforce which is about 380 thousand
strong when you factor in all elements
of the public sector at the city level
by Sunday all non-essential personnel
across all our agencies will be working
from home in some form or fashion or
will be waiting for a specific
assignment many of course can do
telework some we're gonna come up with a
new way for them to work at home even if
it doesn't exist right now some may be
mobilized to address food issues or
other issues at the community level the
estimate at this point will have a
better number for you by the beginning
next week but the estimate is 250
thousand city workers will be out of
their traditional work sites and working
from home unless they are given a very
specific assignment in the field as part
of fighting this crisis that is
approximately two-thirds two-thirds of
our workforce that no longer are working
or what no longer will be working at
their traditional work sites you're
going to see a lot of city offices are
just shut down because we came up with
an alternative and for all city workers
with symptoms of coronavirus as you're
going through those 3 or 4 days waiting
to see if you get better or worse as
you're going through this entire process
we will not take away sick time for
anyone who has symptoms and is waiting
for clarity about this disease we will
not take that off your sick days few
last points questions early in the week
about food stamps and public assistance
want to clarify there are no more in
person interviews for food stamps or
public assistance all of that has been
converted to online and phone interviews
and
sesang very specific issue this is
something I have to say to people and
painful to say it but I've gotten
concerns raised by community leaders we
understand that people at this point
cannot in general go to their house of
worship I understand how painful that is
for people of all different faiths what
a pillar of their lives their faith is
and how important their visit each week
or more often to their house of worship
is but we are in a moment of tremendous
danger and we have to deal with that
reality we have to protect each other so
I know that clergy all over the city and
I've talked to clergy leaders I had a
call with members of our clergy
leadership just a few days ago and there
were unified across all faiths led by
cardinal Dolan unified in recognizing
that many many people will have to
forego traditional religious services
and clergy been leading the way in
telling people to stay home who need to
stay home and in reducing services or
closing them down altogether where
needed but what we have heard in some
communities is that in the absence of
traditional services some individuals
are choosing to create home based
worship services that per se might not
be a danger except when it means in so
many cases that large numbers of
congregants are being crammed into a
very small space which immediately
violates the concept of social
distancing the rule is to try and keep
six feet apart or as close to that as
humanly possible worshiping in a living
room with numerous people immediately
violates that idea and makes everyone
vulnerable I think something unites all
faiths is a desire to protect each other
uplift each other respect each other it
is not helpful it is not safe it is not
faithful to gather large numbers of
people in a small space for informal
services that would only
serve to cause this disease to spread
and you know who will then be in danger
our seniors and those who already are
dealing with serious health care
conditions I don't think there's any
faith on earth that would condone that
so please to all of you who are doing
this or considering doing it please stop
simply forgo traditional services don't
try and recreate him if you feel you
must do a service it needs to be just a
small handful of people a socially
distance 6 feet per person apart or else
you're creating a risk to all those
involved close with a reminder thank God
we see that for younger healthier people
this is a disease that they can see
through and come out safely
overwhelmingly so let's keep the focus
on those in need those who are most
vulnerable and let's help them out
anytime you can help your fellow New
Yorker need I know a lot of people have
been stocking up on groceries and all
sorts of household goods if you know
someone who needs help come on don't
keep it all for yourself share with your
fellow New Yorker that's how we're gonna
get through this this will get worse
before it gets better we've all heard
that phrase but this is probably the
most blunt example we're gonna see in
our lives of the notion that this is
gonna get worse before it gets better we
have to brace ourselves for that but it
will get better it will get better in
the end and we will see it through few
words in Spanish Leppa demos los New
York Eno's que se quedan en Casa a menos
que tengan que salir por una razn
essencial SI tiene sin tomas Levis pero
esta Sano no sir Agha la cueva de
coronavirus juntos tenemos que trata
hair a las mas vulnerables with that I
want to turn to our health commissioner
I know as a mess
it's a real urgency and she'll say it in
English and Spanish both but remember
doctor are serous Barbeau is the city's
doctor for those who have a doctor's
she's also your doctor for those who
don't have a doctor she's your doctor
she is going to tell you now the truth
you need to hear doctor Barbeau Thank
You mr. mayor
and I actually I want to start where you
left off in terms of things will get
worse before they get better and
actually what I have been saying is that
things will get worse before they get
bad and how fast things get better will
depend on all of us this is a sober
moments that we are in with regards to
the city's health and as the city's
doctor I take pause when I look at the
speed with which we are identifying new
cases and I take further pause when I
put that against precious resources that
are quickly dwindling and I call upon
all New Yorkers to take this seriously
this calls into action our personal
responsibility our civic responsibility
to ensure that we take every measure
possible so that we minimize the
potential risk and harm to New Yorkers
those that are most vulnerable to this
virus those that are elderly have
underlying chronic illnesses and who
otherwise would not be able to access
care over the course of the last several
days I have been conveying messages to
New Yorkers about how they can protect
themselves those messages hold true
ensuring that we are diligent about
keeping up with hand hygiene covering
our mouths and our noses when we coffin
when we sneeze but the reality is that
at this point in the outbreak we need to
do more we need to do more if we are
going to stave off the onslaught of
potential cases that are facing the city
and doing more means staying
if you are not an essential worker I
need you to stay home if you are
developing symptoms I need you to stay
home and stay away from individuals who
are at risk for bad outcomes such as
those that are over 50 and have chronic
illnesses such as those who may have
disabilities and not be able to isolate
themselves I need you to ensure that you
stay home and you don't worry about
whether or not you have a test I want
you to think about you've already been
exposed and having a test doesn't really
make a difference the important thing is
that you stay home you stay home for at
least three to four days and that if
you're getting better to stay home for
seven days or 72 hours after your fever
has gone away and if you're not getting
better after three or four days that's
when you should reach out to your doctor
one of the most important ways in which
we as New Yorkers have an opportunity to
slow the spread of kovat 19 is by
staying home social distancing is the
single most important tool that we have
to reduce this potential onslaught of
kovat 19 infections it's the best chance
that we have of ensuring that our health
care delivery system isn't overrun with
individuals who are coming to the
emergency room or coming to the doctor's
office because they're worried and in
reality they have maybe minimal symptoms
this is an opportunity for New Yorkers
to step up and to stay home if they have
no symptoms or minimal symptoms the best
chance that we have to reduce the number
of people who may ultimately died
because of COBIT 19 is if we take our
personal responsibility in this
seriously and if we all take that
covenant
seriously of civic responsibility to
each other's health there will be as the
mayor has said before people who will
succumb to this illness but the reality
is that if we don't protect our health
care system there will also be other
people who die of other reasons because
they haven't had they didn't have the
opportunity to access the vital health
care that they need so this is as much
about protecting our resources to treat
kovat 19 as it is to protect those
precious healthcare resources so that
folks who may develop heart attacks who
may have ongoing needs for cancer
treatment can get secure ongoing access
to those important health care services
the last thing that I want to ensure you
that I share with New Yorkers is that as
the city's doctor my job is to make
recommendations that may not be popular
and I don't take those recommendations
lightly I know that asking people to
socially distance creates hardships and
as the mayor have set has said we are
putting measures in place to try and
reduce those hardships but the reality
is that unless we take those serious
steps to socially distance ourselves for
the foreseeable future we may find
ourselves in a place that overruns our
healthcare delivery system and overruns
other systems so I need New Yorkers to
take this opportunity to only get tested
if they're not getting better to look
out for our elders and ensure that they
have all the resources that they need to
make it easy for them to stay home
safely and to only reach out to their
doctors if they're not getting better
and lastly though we're asking people to
socially distance physically distance
this is a time for us to come together
emotionally and spiritually I want to
remind New Yorkers that we have
a tremendous resource and NYC well I
encourage people to call or text reach
out to NYC well the news that people are
hearing every day is sobering and today
I hope it's clear that we are changing
the tone I am changing the tone and that
may create anxiety it may create
feelings that individuals need help
working through this is the time to
really access NYC well I want to now
just make some remarks en espanol en
este momento estamos en un momento de
este brote donde esta mosby endo casos
ms rpida mint a donde los recursos
they el sistema medico esta en peligro
de no tener lo har Corsos que
necesitamos es uno momento que
necesitamos que todo new yorky nose
domain su responsabilidad de asegurar s
tanto mando las medidas recommended as
para seguir our keynote runs meeting lb
rose seat estan co-infection y que todo
lo mas possible a man tengan say adentro
in no Saigon si no es necesario es un
momento
donde necesitamos que todo lo new yorky
knows Tomi medidas para asegurar que
tenga Mo's como una ciudad la mejor
oportunidad para asegurar que this mu nu
y hemos a numero the new yorky knows he
sang effective as por esta veeru's eat
am being a supporter nada meant
es que no tengo Mo's tantas personas que
si es campur causa de esta veeru's
gracias thank you very much commissioner
okay we are going to now turn to
questions from the media one emphasize
to our colleagues in the media please
ask your question if there's an obvious
follow-up I'll certainly take that but
want to try and get to every member of
the media who has a question as we do
even when we're in person so
entertaining a first question I'll
entertain a follow-up if there is but
then we're going to aggressively move to
the next person to get through everyone
and I know Olivia from our press office
will be managing the flow of the
questions so Olivia please start the
questions first up is Alejandra from New
York hi hi mr. mayor
speaker Johnson proposed atto billion
relief plan for city businesses and
workers impact by the pandemic can you
share your thoughts on that could you
repeat the specific figure I couldn't
hear you twelve billion yeah the reality
right now we obviously there's
tremendous need for relief for our small
businesses and working people but that
has to come from the federal government
right now we have to be very mindful
that our city government is paying for a
lot of extraordinary expenses and while
dealing with real revenue challenges
we're going to keep serving New Yorkers
no matter what but those really big
bailouts have to come from the federal
government and that's exactly what
Senator Schumer's talking about right
now and he's one of the people leading
the way federal government is the place
that has that capacity they need to do
it thank you thank you
next up is Alexander moon from chalk
beat I just say a little louder it's
Allison Alex Zimmerman from chalk beat
Alex go ahead hi mr. mayor two quick
questions one is just I knew the city
had said that they that there are about
300,000 families um who are in need of
devices to access remote learning I'm
wondering whether the city thinks it
will have all of those and Families
hands bye-bye this coming Monday okay we
have a special chair well distanced from
me for some of our key leaders of this
administration
Chancellor Carranza has now joined us
and he will give you the answer so we're
not going to have 300,000 devices by
Monday that's we never said we would we
do have a plan for having those devices
in the hands of our students in the
coming weeks there are 25,000 devices
that will be distributed over the next
week to families we are in the
right now of collecting the survey
results that teachers and principals
have been sharing with families over the
course of these last three days that
they've been at their school sites we
are prioritizing students in public
housing students that are homeless and
low-income title one students as
priority to get those devices right off
the bat but we will we are committed to
having devices for all of our students
also important to understand that
schools have laptop carts schools have
laptop computers many of the schools are
assigning those assets that they have in
their schools to the students as well so
it's not just purely devices that are
being purchased but also schools are
assigning devices that they have in
their schools as well the good news as
well is that while we are ready to go in
remote learning mode there are a number
of resources that are still in your
hands kind of materials that families
over the next few days will be picking
up as well so we're gonna be
transitioning in this way but those
devices will be here in a matter of
weeks stay there is that going out did
you have another yeah just do you know
how many what the gap will be on Monday
like how many more you'll have to go by
that or what the number of time and yeah
we know we don't know that but we'll
keep it we'll keep updating as we get
more yeah we're getting information in
real time so we'll update as we get that
information and the second question was
just I know in the past positive cases
it seems like that stopped and I'm just
wondering like why the city has stopped
confirming positive cases given that
their teachers for the last three days
well it's a couple of different things
I'll start and the Chancellor can jump
in I mean first of all we said you guys
it seems like a century ago but I think
it was last week that we were not going
to be able to go over individual cases
the way we used to in any way shape or
form and the number here is staggering
obviously there will be specific
situations where we have information we
think is crucial to share on a stick
case but I think that that will be a
rarity honestly in terms of school
communities well obviously the vast
majority of school buildings are shut
down except for that food function this
week and that's going to be reset next
week into something different what we
still managed to get a lot of food out
but but it will not be all school
buildings we're working on what that
looks like
there will be a small number of specific
learning centers for children of
essential workers and that's being
engineered as we speak - and
everything's happening in real time
because none of us have ever done any of
this before we're creating constantly so
I think the fact is that the the reality
of updating you as fundamentally changed
I think obviously two things one going
forward as we have ongoing facilities
like those learning centers for the
children of essential workers Gravas
gonna be very mindful if any person in
that building gets sick they're gonna be
immediately isolated and will work in
every way to make sure anyone else'
needs to be isolate it will be but we've
entered such a different realm here I
think that dr. Barbosa emphasized this
that we simply can't do what we used to
do even just a week or two ago but now
what's been replaced by general rules
for everyone to follow and this is based
on an assumption it's a painful one for
us all to understand but that
coronavirus is now widespread in our
city and so we have to approach it
differently so dr. just taking this
example if in one of our feeding
stations or one of our learning centers
someone who work there you know was
symptomatic or later tested positive how
we're going to approach that situation
and how people have to live by some
general rules now that are different
absolutely so as I've said in previous
press conferences at this point in time
with a degree of community spread that
we have individuals who develop symptoms
of fever and a cough shortness of breath
sore throat should a
soon that they have been exposed to cove
at 19 and they should take the
appropriate measures of isolating
themselves staying home for seven days
from the onset of symptoms and if they
have fever to stay home three days after
the fever is gone whichever of those is
longer but the reality is that when on a
daily basis we have new cases that are
in the triple double digits and the
triple digits it becomes that and I'll
be blunt here really meaningless to go
through a case-by-case accounting what's
important here is ensuring that we focus
on vulnerable populations focusing on
protecting the healthcare delivery
system and employing New Yorkers to do
the right thing to stay home and to not
overload our emergency departments I
think we need to be ready to see that
kind of volume and to redirect our
thinking away from individual cases and
how it is that together as a city we're
protecting our healthcare workforce and
we're protecting our most vulnerable
thank you
who's next Olivia next is and Rousseff
from NBC New York Andrew Andrew yes can
you hear me yep okay mayor the question
is about this San Francisco style some
call it a shelter-in-place but I know
you and the governor have been having a
little bit of a verbal disagreement
about what to call it the question is if
you're going to issue a directive or a
recommendation or an urging that people
stay at home like they've done in San
Francisco why not do it right now why
not why wait until Friday or Saturday or
Sunday or Monday what are you waiting
for
thank you Andrew let me try and lay out
a couple of facts I think I'll make it
clear first of all we are working with
the state of New York I spoke to the
governor yesterday I'm going to speak
to him later on today we need to be
coordinated with the state of New York
period that's the right thing to do in
terms of being effective for our people
that's the right thing to do according
to the law we will be coordinated with
the state of New York and the state of
New York has to make the ultimate
decision here I respect that I respect
the governor we doesn't matter if we've
had disagreements along the way right
now we're in a crisis together and I
would note that I actually think the
governor has handled this crisis very
well that I agree with the decisions
he's made that there's I cannot think
literally of a major decision that I
disagreed with so in this instance I
think the definition really matters and
I want to be clear and I think I thought
it was understood and clearly wasn't and
that's on me that when I first made this
point it was as we saw San Francisco
make its announcement it is there a
public health order and they use the
phrase shelter in place but with a
variety of steps to ensure that
essential services would continue and
that people could still get basic goods
they needed food medicine etc I think
that San Francisco model is a clear sort
of humane smart version of shelter in
place that really keeps the essentials
going but gets rid of everything
non-essential I think it's a smart
approach and anyone who's not clear on
what it is or what it isn't it's not
hard to find just go on the city of San
Francisco website and it's a couple of
pages and you'll see exactly what
they're doing but you know for the city
of New York in the state of New York the
decision has to be made by the governor
looking at all the factors and I've
given him a sense of what we're seeing
and what I think we need here but I also
understand he has to think about the
entire state has to think about the
interconnection of the city to
surrounding counties that are real
issues so this is something he feels
urgency
I feel urgent see it has to be decided
quickly what additional steps will be
taken he did something I think very good
today by
taking that level the 75% for businesses
to clear out their employees and get
them home and I know the governor is
taking a series of other actions to
reduce non-essential activity which I
agree with so that conversation will
happen later on today and then I'll
certainly have an update for people by
tomorrow who's next Olivia
up next is Bridget bergen from WNYC
Bridget can you hear me
regi good I don't hear Bridget Bridget
can you hear us Bridget we can't hear
you so we'll come back we'll come back
to Bridget up next is Aaron Durkin from
Politico New York Aaron can you hear me
yes I can
there you go loud and clear okay great
any particular steps to prevent the
spread of coronavirus there and are
there any confirmed cases among natural
residents on the question of confirmed
cases I have not been told of a case
among NYCHA residents but I also want to
note that with the numbers growing it's
harder to specifically confirm exactly
who is where obviously but I have not
been told of anything among nights or
residents in terms of steps I know I've
spoken to the Chairman and the general
manager they've done a lot of outreach
you know fliers and and robo calls and
electronic messages telling their
residents how to approach this crisis
has done lots of extra cleaning
obviously and we know this from Sandy
and the years since sandy and I know
emergency management commissioner of
Criswell is here works with nature to
keep track of any residents who have
particular medical needs who need
medicines or who are incapacitated need
help so they're aware of who to check on
and see if they need anything special
those are the basics but I can get you a
more detailed update on night I'm
looking to Freddy we can we can have
that for you get you some of that later
today and have more for you tomorrow as
well
is Bridget back or not no we're gonna go
to a Gersh next and they'll come back
Kirsch and you hear me yes indeed I may
be a journalist but I first want to say
I hope you and your family and your team
are well and safe Thank You Gersh and
you are that's very much a preacher and
your family and all your colleagues are
safe well who knows anyway it was not
reassuring we hope you're safe but I
have to be honest anyway my team is
separated so that's fine so last week
when you urged New Yorkers to bike to
work if they could there has indeed been
a huge surge in cycling and now new NYPD
statistics just released today showed
that there has been a 43% increase in
injuries to cyclists even as injuries to
drivers and pedestrians are down by
double-digit percentages now you know
that cities around the globe were
expanding their safe cycling networks
during the crisis bogota-colombia is
adding 47 miles of new routes and you've
been asked by Transportation
Alternatives and by Manhattan borough
president Gale Brewer to provide those
safe routes when will you act on this
well the first I heard honestly and
Gersh I think you understand I know you
have an area of particular focus I
respect that I think you understand
where we're trying to address many many
issues simultaneously the first I
actually heard was from the borough
president late yesterday and I think
it's an important proposal so we will
get a sense quickly from our Department
of Transportation of where we think
there are areas that we can do that in
real time I think it's a very fair point
wherever we can do a fast expansion we
will I think there's going to be some
obvious limits as we deal with so many
other challenges in this crisis but we
want people biking who can so I'll have
an answer for you on that tomorrow
okay thank you thank you
who's next Gloria from New York one
Gloria yes go ahead Gloria
mr. mayor I wondered if your
administration has done any follow up on
the reports of a cluster
over in Brooklyn as we see the numbers
increasing there and if you have any
update or any new information I know you
noted in your remarks your message to
people about religious gatherings but
I'm wondering if part of the reason you
did that is because you are seeing an
increase in that kind of activity in
that particular community and if your
health care officials have any update
about the possibility of there being a
cluster in that area so first let me say
I spoke to some leaders as I mentioned
earlier in the week I spoke to a broad
range of faith leaders led by the
Cardinal spoke yesterday to a number of
leaders of the Jewish community who did
note their real concern about those in
the home crowded services so I wanted to
be very very clearest but it's not just
for the Jewish community it's for all
communities because anybody who in
pursuit of their faith understandably
wants to keep their services going I
fully understand that but I can't do it
in a way that's dangerous to themselves
and others so that's where our being
very very explicit you cannot have those
in-home gatherings that crowd people
together the I've asked our health
commissioner just in the last hour so
whether there are any what we call
clusters anywhere in New York City the
answer remains no there are areas all
over the city where we're seeing major
increases we can say the commissioner
and I both would be very quick to
indicate if we thought someplace was
going through an extraordinary situation
commissioner I'll speak to why we think
there's some particular focus in
Brooklyn particularly around Borough
Park that is not indicative of a bigger
problem than anywhere else but just a
different dynamic but no right now we
are seeing growth in the disease it with
some consistency across the five
boroughs and that part of Brooklyn is
not any more in danger than anywhere
else so commissioner why don't you
explain why we're seeing some of that
concern absolutely and as you said and I
want to emphasize we are seeing
widespread community transmission in all
of our boroughs and concerns about
quote-unquote clusters really at this
point in the outbreak just indicate
widespread transmission when we have
particular institutions that may be more
aggressively testing individuals we may
see what we think of as quote-unquote
false signals but this is an opportunity
to remind New Yorkers that we need to
have access to testing for the people
that need it the most people that are in
hospitals and intensive care unit and
not getting better people who have been
at home and getting worse and where
their doctors feel that it is having a
test result is necessary for their
treatment plan we are not recommending
that there be widespread testing because
again when you've got widespread
community transmission and you have
symptoms
I want New Yorkers to assume that
they've been exposed to Cove in 19 and I
want them to follow doctor's orders to
stay home until they are better 7 days
or 72 hours after their fever is gone
whichever is longer absolutely go ahead
mr. mayor I just I wanted to you cite
incredible numbers about what the city
is going to be in need of 50 you're
talking about numbers in the millions if
the federal government does not step up
and you're talking about two weeks
timeline with how the speed that we're
seeing things move at how confident are
you that the federal government will
step up in in in the needed time and
what are you going to do what is the
city going to do if the delays continue
and we run out of these supplies in the
next couple of days it's not the next
couple of days that we're worried about
glory I want please I thought I was very
precise and I want to say to my
colleagues in the media you have a
sacred responsibility right now and even
more so than last week we are going into
a full-blown crisis such as we have not
seen in generations you have a sacred
responsibility to ensure
the information that you portray the
public is accurate and I would ask you
please to be very very careful not to
provide misinformation by accident I
said very clearly that for the month of
March we have the supplies that we need
the city has very strong reserves of the
kind of supplies that I talked about
there are places where there may be
shortages specifically and we're going
to work to get those shortages addressed
but it's not because we don't have
strong overall supplies to get through
the immediate need it is going into
April that I'm worried about I don't
have a perfect day for you we're
assessing all the time but it is a day
two weeks from now or three weeks from
now where we must by then have had a
very substantial resupply so I think the
simple way to think about is the federal
government has essentially two weeks to
get us major resupply or the people in
New York City are going to be in much
greater danger where do I have
confidence I have confidence in our
state government and in Governor Cuomo I
have confidence in our national guard
here in New York State I have confidence
in the United States military I'd
mentioned in two days ago I spoke to the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
general Milley and we reviewed the kind
of capacity that the military has to
bring to bear in this crisis and what
options they might have and it is a very
very encouraging reality but the
military must be given the order to
mobilize and that order has not been
given it's as simple as that I glory I
don't understand why on earth I even
have to say this sentence I don't know I
don't think any president in American
history would have hesitated to mobilize
our military in this kind of crisis when
we're not in wartime in the sense of a
threat to our shores and we have such
extraordinary military capacity
available to us and the crisis is
growing intensely and there's a global
pandemic I don't think this is even
close so if our military is mobilized
immediately even elements of our
military being
immediately would make all the
difference and if with the defense
production Act those assembly lines
those production capacities are
immediately activated we could get a
steady stream of supplies that will keep
us moving forward there's clearly time
but there won't be time you know a week
or two for now and so if and I've had
this conversation in detail with Senator
Schumer earlier today I went through the
exact numbers with him I understand how
personally and deeply he feels this
crisis he has put forward this Marshall
Plan idea the word is spreading we'll
ask our entire congressional delegation
to fight like hell to get this done but
let's face it the great irony Gloria the
fate of New York City rests in the hands
of one man and he is a New Yorker and
right now he is betraying the city he
comes from we are the front line we are
going through more than almost anyplace
else in the country in by pure numbers
this state is going through the worst of
any state how on earth is the president
sitting idly by and not activating the
forces that could help us so if he acts
today if he acts tomorrow of he acts in
the next few days we can and should get
what we need if he refuses to act we are
going to have an extraordinarily
difficult situation at some point in the
first half of April can you hear me
Bridget Bridget what's up with your
phone Gwen Hogan from WNYC
would you say again I'm sorry Quinn
Hogan when can you hear me Gwen can you
hear me yes okay I got two questions one
just logistical can you give us a
breakdown of how many cases are
hospitalized how many people are in the
ICU and how that squares up with our
current hospital capacity Gwen I have a
report that is helpful but not perfect
so just bear with me because the last
confirm numbers for
hospitalisation I see you were as of
5:00 p.m. yesterday we're trying to get
these numbers to tighten up you can
imagine there's so much of an
information flow we're trying to get
everything aligned better but as of 5:00
p.m. yesterday when obviously the
overall number of cases was you know
substantially lesser we had 554
hospitalizations and 169 ICU cases that
was against the base of about and I say
it you know approximately about 2,000
cases at that point so 554
hospitalizations of which 169 were in
the ICU well then try and constantly
update those numbers and get them closer
to real-time as quickly as we can
increased hospital capacity at that
point how does that what is that out of
total Hospital the reality when as the
executive order that I issued related to
ending elective surgery as that has been
fully in effect in almost every hospital
now has turned off their elective
surgeries there's just a few that are
finishing up now but basically elective
surgeries have been ended across the
city that has opened up a lot of
capacity early discharges as we talked
about the next phase of course will be
building new health care capacity those
tents and other build outs but to handle
the incoming that has been achievable
because so much a space so much
personnel and supplies were being
devoted to elective surgery that that's
not the case anymore so the system is
certainly able to make that adaptation
dr. Katz told me about his visit to
Elmhurst Hospital earlier today where he
saw a place where we've there's been a
number of cases but he saw the the
obvious positive impact of getting the
elective surgeries out of the way and
opening up a lot of space and capacity
for the incoming coronavirus cases so
that I think is our reality at this hour
today
we have to radically expand capacity in
the next two weeks and I think it's a
it's hard for us all to fully understand
the exact trajectory and we are very
careful about telling you what we know
and what we can confirm versus what is
speculative but I think if people think
about that two-week three-week kind of
dynamic and let's be conservative and
just call it two weeks for next two
weeks we have in our hospital system a
lot of capacity we can bring to get bear
a lot of adjustments I'm looking at dr.
Katz right now anything he wants to add
he'll come up and just the power getting
rid of the elective surgeries and
getting the early discharges and surging
in personnel is helping us immensely
again we do have reserve of equipment
and supplies but after two weeks just to
finish after two weeks that situations
will get a lot harder so we have to use
these two weeks to build out all the
capacity we can in hospitals and in new
facilities really quickly and we'll get
you updates on that over the next couple
of days as that is all coming to bear
and again desperately need that federal
resupply while we're doing that
enforcement you mentioned that the NYPD
was doing some enforcing is that of the
closure of bars and and large gatherings
you know my question is really has to do
with like all the stores that are open
there are toy stores open there's
clothing stores open you know in
neighborhoods that I've seen it's like
business as usual except for restaurants
and bars I was just at a factory in
Sunset Park where a bunch of workers had
walked off the job because the they're
not reducing staff there and they don't
have any personal protective gear and
somebody's gotten sick up there so I
just who is enforcing this at this point
so let's you said several different
things I'll respond quickly
the restaurants bars for example as I
said NYPD FDNY buildings sheriff all
participate in different ways lots of
activity because it was so important to
get it right in the first few days
clearly we're seeing tremendous
adherence to the law I think everyone
understands how important it is we'll
keep an eye on that but we have to do
new enforcement in different ways all
the time as the state is issuing new
rules and again I agree with those rules
we're gonna help enforce in every way we
can by the way all those agencies have
to do what they normally do - on top of
that but to your point I do think
there's a lot of things still happening
that again a week ago I I was certainly
trying to see everything I could do to
keep employment going and keep people
having a livelihood and felt very very
deeply concerned about the dislocation
of occur and I feel that still I feel
humanly you know deep pain for the
families that are running out of money
don't have a livelihood but I'm even
more worried about the lives that are on
the line right now because of
coronavirus and that's why I want to see
us take every step we can take to limit
anything non-essential and we will do
all the enforcement in our power to make
that come to life so I think there's
more that still can be done and that's
what we're working on right now
empowered - right now enforce the
workings or the only 25% of and is it
any business staff the state the state
rule on the businesses which was just
issued by the state updated a 75% that
specific enforcement mechanism we're
working with the state right now to
figure out how state and city can play
their own different roles to support
each other on enforcement
what NYPD has been doing is the kinds of
things we already talked about the
restaurants and bars and the other
things related immediate health and
safety and I think you know as this is
going to change I mean I think everyone
look look New Yorkers are very very
realistic people this situations going
to change what we're talking about today
is not going to be the same in two weeks
or three weeks
the NYPD is going to be an extraordinary
Savior here we need our men and women of
the NYPD to adapt to this situation and
help us through anything and everything
we go through and I know they are the
best in the nation they'll answer the
call but we just have to understand it
will change constantly as the rules
change as the
realities change excuse my pronunciation
next up is Hansie lo Wang from NPR to
Europe thank you very much
there can you confirm reports that 20
members of the NYPD have tested positive
for Kovac 19 and what is the city doing
at this point to ensure that first
responders are protected and not
exposing the public to any potential
coronavirus infection given that they
are and in the role of enforcing a lot
of the requirement yeah we need our
first responders we need our health care
workers as so many people are essential
I cannot confirm that number simply
because I have not been given that
update I remind you there are 36,000 men
and women in the NYPD that's just the
uniform side there's you know another I
think 15,000 or so on the civilian side
so they're part of our communities -
there are fellow New Yorkers so a lot of
people will be infected by this disease
thank God a lot of members NYPD
overwhelmingly of course are younger
healthier folks who should not have too
much of a challenge but I'm not
belittling it we are desperately
concerned to protect them that's why we
need that protective equipment we have
given from our health department a lot
to NYPD we're gonna give them more we're
gonna constantly give them more because
they need it they deserve it but we have
to get that federal resupply so I would
say to all the members of NYPD all the
members the FDNY all the members of our
health and hospital system are voluntary
hospitals the city and I know the state
feels the same way we will do everything
we can to get every conceivable supply
of protective equipment from anywhere in
the nation that we can on the private
market and get directly to you but
president Trump has to give the order
for the federal government to get you
what you deserve so I just ask everyone
to join in in issuing the call to the
president to release the supplies that
the federal government has already to
order the production of new supplies on
expedited basis and ensure that our
military distribute them to New York
City and other deeply affected areas
immediately I apologize for interrupting
earlier mayor how is your office keeping
track of confirmed cases among my PDS as
well as their the first responders given
that they do play a big role in how the
city is responding - that's right - it's
exactly the same way and again the fact
I don't have the latest update is
different from the question of how each
agency handles the work I've talked to
our Police Commissioner our fire
commissioner even long before this
crisis I'm quite aware of what they do
these are really large sophisticated
agencies with huge amount of personnel
they can always bring more personnel to
bear by keeping people on a shift or by
using over time they're very agile
they're very sophisticated they have
been through situations the the most
horrifying situation you can imagine 911
where our fire department our police
department suffered horrible losses and
yet made immediate adjustments and kept
the city safe they are right now making
adjustments day-to-day to ensure that
everyone's protected and remember for
the vast majority I'll say it in our
health commissioner can add if she
wishes for the vast majority of our
uniformed service members if they get
sick they will get well quickly because
they are overwhelmingly younger
healthier people we are concerned for
every one of them I don't want to see a
single one get sick I am concerned for
their families I know they are there may
be some individuals who have particular
conditions that make them more
vulnerable but the vast majority of our
first responders are people who have god
forbid they get sick they'll be out of
commission for a limited period of time
then they'll get well then they'll be
back at their post and so that is
something that our fire commissioner our
Police Commissioner understand and
they'll make adjustments as they go
along
I think mr. mayor you covered it all I
don't have anything else except okay
thank you who's next
Henry is up next Henry how are you doing
cookie here me yes Henry go ahead I
actually have two questions totally
unrelated but I want to go back first to
Gloria's question about what is
happening
in Brooklyn because as you know there's
a history of some of these communities
resisting public health measures
resisting inoculations for measles and
these communities are intensely
religious and very tightly knit and it
would seem to me that it's almost
counterintuitive not to think that
there's a cluster going on even the
closeness of these communities and the
history of skepticism that they have
it's a very fair and knowledgeable
question but I'm going to tell you a
couple of things one I spoke with a
number of community leaders who I know
very well and I think you know Henry I
know the community deeply I represented
it in various ways over the years very
directly I heard things I never thought
I'd hear in my life from leaders of
community who made very clear how many
schools have been shut down how they
were urging the shut down of those
remaining and how much agreement there
was in so much of the community to do it
because I think what we cannot ignore
here this is not the measles which was a
very difficult time for all of us and
you know we had to all work together
with the community of fight it back this
is a global pandemic a disease that no
one on earth fully understands has no
cure no vaccine Jewish community in all
communities have been affected by that
understanding so I think you're seeing
things happening here that you would not
see in normal situations I mentioned the
example of the the gentleman who told me
he's keeping his his parents away from
their grandchildren on purpose and what
never did that before in his life I
think a lot of people are waking up
quickly to what dr. Barbosa said I just
hope everyone's listening to dr. Barbeau
and she says we have to change what
we're doing right now to protect
ourselves and our families so I
understand your question but I'm telling
you and I've asked my own liaisons who
work with the community to confirm this
we are seeing things we have literally
never seen before
Jules closing people only
socializing with their own family not
with neighbors not going to religious
service with their neighbors we're
seeing things that are very very
different and as to the facts about the
numbers of cases dr. barb Oh I've asked
her probably five times in the last week
because it's come up so many times she
pours over two numbers all the time
there is nothing happening of that part
of Brooklyn that is meaningfully
different than what is happening in
parts of the rest of the city it's just
the fact okay my second question had to
do with the fiscal impact on the city
the Comptroller has come up with his
estimate is that an accurate estimate I
think it was something like 1.4 billion
or around there it's way too early to
make that assessment in an ever-changing
situation say a few things we intend to
in about a month's time we will do the
executive budget we intend to keep it on
time we will have to of course account
for what's probably very substantial
changes in revenue and very new expenses
I also want to believe and I think even
within the course of a month we might
see a stimulus bill and a bailout for
localities on a level we've never seen
before in decades we should see that I
don't know for sure if we will but I
think there's a lot of movement in that
direction so we need to look at the
whole picture and I think we're gonna
have a tough time Henry I think we have
a very tough time I think we will find a
way and the big x-factor will be how
much federal support comes in directly
to New Yorkers money directly in their
pockets and directly to localities and
obviously then the reimbursement levels
for localities after the fact all of
those issues need to be factored in and
we'll do that through the budget process
okay have you made a request to the feds
on this issue yet we have made a request
to the feds on everything that we need
right now to ensure our hospitals
operate and and all those frontline
needs and we have a guarantee which has
been stated in many different ways
including from the president to the
nation that there would be reimbursement
in terms of immediate local
port we've been working with Senator
Schumer on what will be included in that
next stimulus and relief bill so that's
where I think we have an opportunity to
get something done okay thank you
thank you we're gonna go back to Bridget
hopefully third time's the charm
hi mr. mayor can you hear me yeah
Bridget if you didn't want to ask a
question you should have just said so
thank you so much for doing this
virtually and thank you for your
patience with my tech challenges I
wanted to start by asking a follow-up
question related to Rikers Island you
said that the city had identified 40
cases 40 inmates who could potentially
be released I'm wondering if you could
give us a few more details about how
you're identifying potential inmates for
release with the criteria and do you
have an estimate for the number who
could be potentially released or
reviewed it's literally individual by
individual so that number will be after
each case that's pertinent is gone
through we'll get to a point we say okay
we reviewed all pertinent our final
number and of course it could change
over time but the basic approach is the
FDNY and the mayor's office for criminal
justice literally go through each and
every case it's 40 now we certainly
expect more those have to be signed off
on by the relevant DA and/or the state
depending on the situation whether for
example is related to parole violation
or some other situation and the goal is
to get releases starting today if those
sign offs occur and then we'll keep
updating you on the numbers what we're
looking for is we of course don't want
anyone to be older with pre-existing
conditions but anyone who is older with
pre-existing conditions we obviously
would prefer to get out of the facility
if we can and we want to see those who
are at low risk of offending and
obviously we're talking about more minor
charges because we're talking about
those awaiting
at Rikers and those who have been held
has a sentence which means less than a
year sentence and for therefore lower
level offenses this would not be the
case for example if we thought someone
was a threat to the community a high
risk of reoffending a more serious
charge so those are the ways we're
looking at I am told I am told my
forgive me the acronyms overcome me
sometimes Freddie said I said FDNY when
I supposed to NYPD my apology I did not
realize that NYPD and mayor's office of
criminal justice are doing that
individual by individual review Thank
You Freddie thank you talked about how
the work the city's workforce is going
to scale back and that some say offices
may just shut er you know do you have it
can you tell us about you know which for
people who are listening and you know
want to find file building permits or
trying to go to the marriage bureau can
you tell us the places that may they
could anticipate being closed come
Monday not yet but that is a great
question gives me till tomorrow to
answer that because I think the way to
think about it is Bridget that there's a
whole bunch of people we need to be
exactly where they are that's police
officers firefighters of course
EMTs train well transit workers are
obviously mainly the the state but
health care workers of all kinds and
there are some folks who will have to be
in community locations for example when
we set up that education and childcare
for essential workers kids we will need
all the people to staff that necessary
to make that a safe environment an
environment where there's education
where there's food etc so we're gonna
delineate all of that but what we've
come up with is about 250,000 people who
will end up working from home or again
we're gonna even if they don't know how
to do it now we'll create some new
approach to it
or some new assignment I think what it
means is anything that is not essential
that we don't need it are not essential
we don't need it at all right now or not
essential it can be done remotely we're
going to do that but in terms of the
services that will be affected we'll get
that list for tomorrow I've used example
earlier of something like food stamps
and public assistance that will go on
but it will go on remotely and for both
the applicant and for the government
side that'll all be done remotely so
that's an example of something where the
service will continue but you won't need
to go to any office or go to any
in-person interview but let's get you a
list of everything that will continue
even if it's in a different form versus
things that might be put on hold or
disrupted until we get through the core
of this crisis thank you up next is
Heron Ian from world daily report first
name again I believe it's pronounced
heron
is it a heron yes we can hear you
herring it's good okay great and it's
great between you and Governor Cuomo on
sailing of the safety as the mayor
what's your point of view of the sailing
of the city like New York City on what
level this measure will be necessary
like while the austerity teeth in the
city of Abu Han China what I think is
the it's not about quote unquote ceiling
off I appreciate the question I think
it's really important and I have to be
mindful and I'll do my damnedest to be
thoughtful again the other day when I
talked about the San Francisco model of
shelter-in-place this was soon after San
Francisco had announced what it was
doing and called it shelter in place and
it was a public health order I honestly
thought that that had spread so quickly
as the most aggressive action being
taken in the country and obviously a
major metropolitan area in our biggest
state
that I thought that was sort of well
known that that was happening and I was
referring to that model and I should
have been more explicit I was not
referring to closing borders I was not
referring to sealing off the city I was
not referring to closing the bridges I
never referred to any of that ever nor
when we went through the rumors last
week where our you know people were I
had some of the most sophisticated
educated knowledgeable people I've known
in my life calling me frantically saying
you know what's this about the bridges
being closed all and I said there's no
truth to it we would tell you if
something like that is happening there's
no reason for something like that
happening it's not happening so I repeat
again and I ask our colleagues in the
media well I may be inarticulate
sometimes I may be imperfect and I will
take full responsibility and I will
apologize anytime I do but I want people
to know if I give you information you
can always ask for clarification we've
had rather elaborate press conferences
they're long they're detailed and then
any time you can't reach me you can
reach my whole team if anyone heard me
to say well closing the borders I never
said that I never meant it I never
implied it I don't say it now I don't
imply it now I don't mean it now I was
talking about a model being used in a
major American metropolitan area which
is a sharper tighter version of
restrictions still humane still allowing
people to get what they need but through
the vision of or through the prizm I
should say the vehicle of a public
health order that's all I was talking
about anything else would be in a very
very different kind of situation and
while I say again only the state of New
York can make that decision I respect
that and I'll be talking to the governor
again later today and I also want to say
with community spread and again if you
want our health care professionals to
speak to it they can community spread
means that the notion of quote unquote
closing off borders or closing bridges
is a fallacy again more educated people
than I can fill in the blank
this diseases in all 50 states already
it is a global pandemic
you cannot seal off your community and
expect
it not to spread it's something we all
have to deal with so the better way to
approach it is to deal with it is to
educate people get people to really
practice social distancing prepare our
health facilities and get our government
our federal government to do what it is
there for the federal government is
supposed to protect the well-being of
the people is country and and you know
the ultimate line of defense for all
Americans and it's just not doing it now
it's not even close that's where our
energy should be not on too much
obsession with the ideas that are not
even on the table so I hope that's
clarifying and in the vein of having
crystal clear clarity about why it's so
important for us to be aggressive on
social distancing the reason why we're
calling for people to stay indoors is
because when we have person to person
spread in the community we want to
reduce as much of the I would say
firewood as possible from the field so
that we end up reducing the amount of
transmission and reducing the amount of
time that we have such a front load of
cases and so when we when I call for you
know more diligent social distancing its
to remove people from the potential path
of transmission and continuing that
transmission because that is the most
effective way that we have to stop
ongoing community-wide transmission at
the population level it's critical okay
who's next
Javier from Queens Latino Xavier you're
up okay can you hear me yes I know that
the city of New York I didn't need a
carnival for everyone but what about the
undocumented they are more afraid
because
they have a reason to be and they don't
speak very good English and they don't
have the money and they don't have
family and friends here I see people in
the street really really afraid what the
city is going to do to help them Javier
it's what we do for everyone and we
always have I mean this is a city that
for decades has not asked documentation
status has provided people with
education for their kids and support in
so many ways and obviously our police do
not ask documentation status and we're
going to continue but everyone's afraid
I think we're all in this together so
there is no one who needs help who's
going to be turned away
you know we've started a process in the
city of guaranteed health care for all
regardless of documentation status I
hate to say it because this is such a
painful situation but this this pandemic
is telling us even more clearly why we
need a universal health care system in
America and why it is just a fallacy to
think that you can have a health care
system that excludes 12 million people
who happen to be undocumented and yet
everyone else is gonna be safe I think
this horrible situation with the corona
virus is waking us up to the reality of
a global world the reality of healthcare
today in an ever-changing environment if
you want to protect yourself and your
family you should protect the healthcare
of your entire community and your entire
nation so everyone will be served and
anyone undocumented and please spread
the word if they need help they can call
3-1-1 in a host of languages and get
guidance on what to do if they if they
need health care and that's confirmed by
one of our doctors because again if
they're symptomatic they should be like
everyone else stay home and wait those
three or four days and see if it gets
better or worse but if they need health
care it's confirmed they will get it and
they'll pay only what they can pay and
if they can't pay anything they won't
pay anything I don't know what more we
can do in this city - I mean it as a you
know a statement of philosophy we
couldn't be clearer that we there are
fellow New Yorkers our fellow human
beings we will be there for them
up next is Jennifer from The Associated
Press you hear me yeah great thank you
very much I was going to ask now that
testing has increased level it has is
there any thought being given to testing
roots of people symptomatic or not who
might be a particular risk such as
health care workers dr. barb oh there's
no indication for testing asymptomatic
people and and you know it gives me the
opportunity to really highlight the
point that for every unnecessary test
that we do ie for asymptomatic people it
also squanders limited resources of
necessary gowns gloves masks and so
forth every one of those we not only
squander a test but we squander all of
the other critical personal protective
equipment that is in short supply across
the world so there's a double reason why
if we don't want to be testing
asymptomatic people even if their health
care workers we have clear guidance that
healthcare workers who are potentially
exposed being vigilant for any potential
symptoms that they may have we actually
issued a health alert to the tens of
thousands of doctors that we have in
this city and directed them to check
their temperatures twice a day to be
vigilant about the symptoms they have
and to stay home so that advice is the
same advice we give all New Yorkers it's
however more instructive in terms of
actually taking their temperature twice
a day thank you thank you next Julia
Marsh hi Julia can you hear me I can't
can you hear me mr. mayor yes indeed
okay I just wanted to say that I
appreciate you recognizing the sacred
responsibilities that we and the press
have and in that vein just before I get
to my questions I'd like to say and I'm
speaking for many in the press corps we
understand how good
you are but we respectfully request that
these briefings happening more timely
manner as the delays are preventing
dozens of frontline reporters from
getting vital information to the public
well Julia I respect that request but
there's two problems the first is we
have an ever-changing situation and we
assess when we think we'll have the
information we need and then a lot of
times it changes literally while we're
in the middle of preparing so I think
we're going to do this we're going to
try to give you a very conservative time
and I say this with no disrespect we're
gonna give a conservative time for when
we begin we catch information coming
down from the federal government down
from the state government and we have to
make sense of it and we have to be ready
and we have to be accurate we'll give
you a conservative start time if you
want to participate participate if you
don't you don't have to but we cannot
start until we have everything assembled
and proper and that's just the standard
I'm going to hold so I hear you but I
have an obligation to eight point six
million people to get it exactly right
and I know there are many many reporters
who are ready to receive the information
at whatever moment it is available we'll
do our damndest to make it as early in
the day as possible but this I have
never seen a more ever-changing
situation in my life so that's the
ground rule I respectfully that's the
ground rule take it or leave it
okay Thank You mr. mayor and then I have
a couple a couple quick follow-ups and
then a question about Veterans
Administration dr. barb oh and the
Brooklyn cases I'm wondering were you
trying to indicate that people in in
Borough Park and Williamsburg are
getting tested who actually don't need
to know I'm saying that there are
healthcare facilities that may be more
vigorous in their outreach and we are
encouraging providers and we just sent
out a Health Alert to doctors reminding
them that we want to reserve testing for
individuals who are not getting better
and who require hospitalization can I
can I just friendly amendment that
because I want to make sure we're not
miscommunicating I thought Julia's
question was
are there does that particular testing
location for example it was it testing
only priority people according to your
priorities I don't think I think the
answer is no unfortunately I have no way
of confirming that and my concern is
that they were not adhering to our
Juliet just to make sure we're all
speaking the same language and please if
you need to clarify ask again well we we
know when we are seeing the priorities
dr. Barbeau has laid out and dr. Katz's
laid out being followed there's other
times we're not sure they're being
followed and that certainly raises a
concern because we need testing to be
done on that same priority basis
everywhere I just thought that you're
seeing I mean if you look at the the
breakdown in the borough of Brooklyn
forty percent of the cases are in in
Williamsburg and Borough Park I'm so I'm
wondering if if you thought that there
were such a high number there just
because more people were getting tested
so as you know as I've said we're seeing
widespread community transmission there
are we're hearing reports of parts of
the Bronx where many of the clinics are
being inundated with patients we're
seeing different hospitals across the
city indicating increasing numbers of
patients and so while there may be
public reports about increasing testing
in those neighborhoods again our data
indicates that we have hot spots all
over the place and that these places
don't necessarily stand out above
anybody else okay and then mr. mayor
Gwen Hogan asked you about stores that
are still open we also noticed numerous
tourist gift shops in Little Italy in
Chinatown but it's my understanding that
there's no directive that says those
stores have to be closed is that correct
I am NOT gonna pretend to tell you I
know every chapter in verse on
everything that the state has put out in
terms of how it relates to each industry
and whether a gift shop for example fits
under one rule or another the team is
obviously constantly updating
we're doing based on new state guidance
but I think it's I think it's absolutely
right to say those are non-essential
stores and what I've seen is the state
moving sort of sector by sector to
tighten up choosing areas that they
believe are non-essential shutting them
down
obviously limiting the number of people
in workplaces the 75% rule today I think
that's certainly the right thing to do
great and then I'm just lastly on the
Department of Veterans Affairs I think
you said that you're confident that
those professionals there are standing
out there ready to help out but if you
look at the city's VA system right now
they're 393 vacancies that includes 30
medical support assistants 31 nurses and
25 medical officers so it seems like
they themself don't have enough medical
personnel to run the system well III
would be the first to agree with you you
said there are still issues that the
Veterans Administration that need to be
addressed more holistically but I also
be the first to say that we've known for
a while there is excess capacity in
Veterans Administration hospitals so I
would just put the two and two together
say if we know there's beds we want the
beds if we know there's personnel I
would like to see of course the Veterans
Administration work by the same rules
the rest of the healthcare system has
which is to get rid of elective
surgeries do early discharges and open
up as much space as possible so even if
there's areas where they're short of
personnel I have no doubt they could
still be extremely helpful in this
effort
Kiyo Mazza who's that Kyle Meza Kyle hi
mr. mayor can you hear me yeah hold on
we're just getting the volume up a
little of course yes can you hear me now
mr. mayor great thank you for taking my
question and thanks for doing this press
conference especially virtually I'm very
helpful for us mom yes thank you so my
question is will you are you trying to
reach out to President Trump regarding
the shortage of supply
that you are seeing have you spoken with
his administration I know Governor Cuomo
has been in contact with President Trump
when they do the governor video
conferences but have you I reached out
to vice president pence
his team was very responsive but they
referred me the secretary SR I I am of
course like everyone else trying to
remember which day was which but I think
it was four days ago I spoke to
secretary Hayes our and that was about
some of the issues I will certainly be
speaking to him again I have spoken to
Senator Schumer who has been obviously
our greatest advocate in Washington I
know he is speaking to vice president
pence so as I've told you all I've
spoken to dr. foul Qi I've made him
aware of the situation I'm sure he will
make others aware of it because this is
his hometown and he is doing such
amazing work for this nation so I'm
certainly going to try again to reach
vice president Pence who the presidents
put in charge of this effort I'll
certainly be talking to secretary azar
again but my hope is a combination of
the efforts of secretary Schumer the
efforts of Governor Cuomo the efforts of
other members of the delegation and just
the sheer public demand because let's
face it the the more that the president
a vice president and a cabinet hear from
the people from leaders of all sectors
business community everyone that this is
an unacceptable situation we here in the
nation's largest city and I am Telling
You point-blank that we have a real
danger up ahead and we've codified it in
letters to all you know top federal
officials I mean there's a point at
which you say are people actually taking
responsibility or not so I'm gonna hope
and pray that if we sound the alarm
enough times someone will listen well
also as a follow-up Trump also said
governor's are supposed to be doing a
lot of this work the federal
government's not supposed to be out
there buying vast amounts of items and
then shipping you know we're not a
shipping clerk but you also said earlier
in your remarks that President Trump is
betraying the city so I wanted to get
your reaction first to what he said in
his press briefing at the White House
and then I also want you to sit at say
whoa is it fair to say that giving a
crisis that we're saying from your side
that he is betraying New York City where
he came from it's abundantly clear to
say he's betraying his hometown and he
unfortunately is letting down his entire
nation I have worked in the federal
government I understand the different
responsibilities but this is a time of
crisis and the greatest example American
history was a great New Yorker named
Franklin Delano Roosevelt during the
Great Depression who ensured that the
federal government would do things had
never done before to protect people and
saved our nation that was a time that
was much more shocking if you will well
there was no road map in the least there
weren't the kind of there was no kind of
technology communications our government
was very very small at a time and
Franklin Roosevelt had the audacity to
say we're gonna build something entirely
new to save this country and now we've
got a president with a vast military a
massive government with literally
endless resources effectively and he
won't use them and no mayors and
governors cannot make supplies appear
out of thin air
we we have powers but not the kind of
powers to get factories in other states
to have to produce something we need or
to get it from another state to here in
a manner that's prioritized and
guaranteed that's what we need we've got
two or three weeks for God's sakes the
only way you know that goods are going
to be produced on a huge scale and
gotten where they need to be is to use
that war production act to the fullest
I'm sorry defense production act to the
fullest and to ensure the United States
military does the logistics it's the
only way you can guarantee at this point
you know if the President had acted two
weeks four weeks six weeks ago when he
could have there might be having a
different discussion but wake up we are
really running out of time and the only
way it works is if the federal
government in
immediately uses all of its muscle to
save this city and a lot of other places
next Haiti yes Katie you're up Katie can
you hear us I will come back Katie who's
next
Marc Morales from CNN say Dame
Marc Morales Marc yes Marc how you doing
mr. mayor
good good good so I just wanted some
clarification the number it back to
Borough Park in Williamsburg in that
area the number that's being reported is
more than a hundred so two questions
what's that number at now and if that's
not a cluster then then why isn't it a
cluster is it is that number is it lower
than that number or so yeah
citywide as the mayor mentioned we've
got above 3,000 people and it's to be
expected that we would have high numbers
in all of our neighborhoods and so when
we talk about a cluster it is a
situation where we can trace it back to
an originating source when you've got
widespread community transmission it is
impossible to draw it back to a single
source because there are so many
opportunities for individuals to have
gotten infected gotcha okay so so then
what's that number for Barra Park in
Williamsburg now you know we'll have to
get back to you on that
right again it's a hundred cases which
no one takes lightly but against what at
that hour was 3615 overall for the city
over a thousand for Brooklyn so but we
will get to more Mary Frost from the
Brooklyn Eagle so again Mary Frost from
Mary me go yes
that's hi good afternoon so I asked the
traditional question can you hear me yes
Mary okay great
there's a two-part question the first is
you're hearing that younger people are
actually being hospitalized in greater
numbers than expected even though they
are not dying at the rate of older
people and the related to that is a
number of younger people are telling me
that they feel compelled to work in the
gig economy because they have student
loans that apparently can't be deferred
or they have all kinds of problems
deferring them can you address these
questions okay on the younger people
I'll let dr. Barbosa we've talked about
what we've seen globally and
consistently about the impact on young
people no one has ever said there won't
be some young people who don't go
through a more serious situation but
overwhelmingly we've seen young people
healthy keyword healthy young people
have very limited impact I don't have a
number in front of me for hospitalized
out of that five hundred fifty-four as
of 5:00 p.m. yesterday I don't have a
number in front of me of how many are
under 18 but I've you could speak to the
larger situation so we are looking at
the data on a continuous basis and by
and large the vast majority of people
who have tested positive are above the
age of 18 we are not seeing clinically
anything that as of this moment looks
differently from what's being observed
in other countries which is that
primarily the people who do end up
hospitalized then who may have more
severe cases tend to be older
individuals and especially those with
chronic underlying conditions excuse me
well this report is referring to the
group between 18 and 46 so again the
majority of individuals that we're
seeing hospitalized with severe
conditions tend to be individuals who
are above that age but that's not to say
that we don't have people who are
between 18 and 49 who have been
hospitalized but it's not out of
proportion again at this point in the
outbreak in terms of what we're seeing
it doesn't seem to be out of proportion
with what's being observed in other
countries okay thank you and can you can
the mayor can you address something
about the pressure that people in the
gig economy are feeling from their
student loans and debts oh I think
people in the gig economy are feeling
just immense pressure that the economy
is for so many people falling apart and
they're they're going through a lot now
I am NOT up to date on the federal or
state actions on student loans obviously
that's not something the city regulates
my understanding is there's been some
kind of relief or suspension around
interest payments or something like that
I'm not again and forgive me I don't
have all those details but I look at
this point like everything else
happening we need extraordinary measures
this would be an ideal time to postpone
all student debt in the middle of this
kind of crisis because a huge number of
people are in no position to pay it
right now we're talking about yesterday
I heard a federal official mentioned the
possibility of 20% unemployment 20
percent of employment puts you damn
close to where we weren't a great
depression that has the only time in our
country's history the best of my
knowledge we've ever been at that level
you're gonna have a vast number of
people cannot afford to pay for a lot of
things especially student loans so that
should be part of any kind of bailout
package to suspend those payments give
people a substantial grace period until
they can get back on their feet and be
in a position to pay again who's next
Matt chase Matt for taking my questions
yes a couple of them first to what
extent does the governor's executive
order yesterday and limit can do and to
what extent does it limit what you can
do one of the orders you've already
signed and then at the top of the call
you listed certain very important vital
items that you're running out of masks
coveralls ventilators etc approximately
how many of these items that you listed
you have right now assuming the feds do
come through with this wish list
how long will the supplies last and
finally William Elon Musk
producing ventilators for the city I
know there have been some back-and-forth
on Twitter was Elon Musk we were very
happy to receive his offer a help we're
trying to assess what it means and how
quickly could make an impact and you
know I'm holding out the idea you know
the the hopeful idea that he could do
something that's important here but we
have not been able to confirm what it
means yet specifically we'll get to more
on that when we know on the question of
timeline I think I spoke to it earlier
in this session I'll just say it again
we will be supplied through the month of
March and into the beginning of April a
few days ago I don't have all of it in
front of me now but a few days ago I
delineated the kind of reserves we had
in terms of masks and other capacity
other supplies again we have thank God
the biggest best health care apparatus
anywhere in a country and we do have
what we need to get through the next at
minimum two weeks hopefully in three
weeks or more but it is time to be blunt
and honest that we must be resupplied
and so that's what I'm saying here today
I have been being abundantly clear for
the month of March we have supplies it
will take us into the beginning of April
and how long will that last if the feds
come through when will you need another
restock again respectfully Matt I think
I've said this numerous times we need to
be I've said two weeks is the good
working rule it could be more like three
the federal government must activate its
capacity immediately so that we can
start to get those supplies within the
next two weeks we don't need everything
simultaneously but we need substantial
resupply in the next two weeks maximum
three weeks last two back to Katie Katie
can you hear me now yes thank you sorry
thanks for the text help to the to the
web a team into Libya my question is I
know you said that the numbers of
patients are updated every day at 10:00
and 6:00 it's now 644 p.m. you have
those updated numbers because the data
were working with from 10:00 a.m. and
it's probably
this point unfortunately really out of
date yeah when I say there it's updated
Katie that we have to there's a lot of
cross-checking that happens and so six
o'clock is the time that they as I
understand that they saw a call time out
at 6:00 and then they have to do all the
analysis to make sure it's right if we
have and I'll turn to the team if we
have something ready for publishing now
I will happily do it if we don't we'll
get it to you when we have it we're
checking right now no wait it's not it
is not ready yet is what we're getting
but that's when we do have it we'll put
it out thank you and secondly I know
that you announced you have some
facilities the new drive-thru facilities
and other boroughs
I know Queens had some some of the
highest numbers but I don't know if they
have the same level of testing
capabilities as other boroughs well let
me clarify again I explicitly did not
use the word drive-thru because they're
not drive-through so I want to be really
really clear about that and again ask
everyone I'll try and be really precise
I'm sure I'll be imperfect but if you're
ever need clarification please say so
the on testing centers through H and H
ten new sites at hospitals those are not
drive through each will serve 150 people
- per day I would testing eight open
already Bellevue Elmhurst Harlem Jacobi
Kings County Lincoln Woodhull Queens
hospital two more open next week Coney
Island and Jacobi none drive through on
the 7:00 news sites at the Gotham
clinics these are also not drive through
each will serve 50 to 75 people and
those are all open will be open this
week pelvis Cumberland East New York
grooving ear Morrisania Sidon ham
Vanderbilt for new testing centers a
hundred people per day to open Coney
Island Jacobi - coming up
Kings County Queens hospital none drive
through all everything I've just said by
appointment and prioritized testing only
the only drive throughs are the state
operated one on Staten Island and the
five that are coming in coordination
with FEMA but
don't have locations or start dates for
those yet that's what I was asking about
so do we know when we'll get those
locations and start dates yet just what
I said we don't have it yet and when we
have it we'll tell you last but not
least yo of yo of I'm mr. mayor hey two
questions one I I know you said there's
no citywide shortages and there's not
expected to be for a few weeks but are
you hearing from individual hospitals
about specific shortages either of mass
or ventilators and if so what is the
city doing about those and can you
identify anyone any that you might have
heard from I heard rumors but then
generally and you know again we have the
health commissioner here CEO of Health
and Hospitals here emergency management
commissioner here I think if anyone has
different information they'll jump in
but we heard rumors we did some
follow-ups I think there were some
places that had either you know they
were getting worried about a shortage or
they had some very particular thing they
needed some quick infusion of but the
basic reality has been we have supplies
and if health facilities need them
meaning hospitals we can get them where
they need to go but I am not seeing this
as a major problem at this point I am
very concerned going forward but I don't
see as a major problem at this point dr.
Katz you want to add or dr. barb oh I
would just like to validate what the
mayor has said Health and Hospitals runs
11 hospitals and there have been moments
when we've needed to move supplies from
one hospital to another there are also
people who are sensibly worried that
we'll we have enough supplies for two
weeks from now and as the mayor has been
very clear that's why we need restocking
so I want to assure people that yes as
of this moment we do have enough
supplies and we're able to move supplies
and I know that's true of other
hospitals but also understand why people
may not have that perception because
they're looking at in their Hospital how
many of the n95 masks are there right
now and thinking this is not enough so I
understand the concerns and I certainly
appreciate the mayor's call for help for
us to get that restocking but at the
moment the hospitals have what they need
so to both our doctors here I think be
really helpful I think it's a very
important question let's kind of
demystify a little if voluntary hospital
or an HNH facility needed suddenly more
surgical mass or whatever it was just
let's explain to our colleagues in the
media how that request would be acted on
who would they call and what happens
next to make sure they get what they
need and obviously our emergency
management commissioner might want to
chime in as well does either you want to
start sure I'll start go ahead so we
work closely with our state counterpart
to ensure that we communicate with our
hospitals on a regular basis and query
them on where they are with regards to
specific supplies related to masks gowns
etc and we ask them how long they think
that the particular supplies will last
and if they are anticipating a delivery
so that if there are concerns about
potential shortages we then work with
our partners at nice um office of
emergency management and at the state to
ensure that these hospitals get their
supplies in a timely manner yes and to
demystify as the mayor has asked all of
our 11 hospitals have already been
moving supplies and moving patients so
some of our hospitals have been more
heavily affected such as Elmhurst and
other hospitals and we've responded as a
system by moving supplies staffing to
Elmhurst to do that and also move to
other patients who didn't need to be at
Amherst to other hospitals so that's
what hospital systems do to respond in a
crisis like this okay thank you and I
did want to ask one other thing about
the disease detectives I'm curious if
their role has changed now that the
number of cases coming in is so high you
were planning to double the
of the team but if they are still doing
what they were doing how do you decide
which cases to investigate and is that
work even you know how useful is it at
this point of widespread community
spread I'll start and pass to the
commissioner we doubled the number we're
going to continue adding it you know
we're in a different strategic context
but there are plenty of situations where
that work is absolutely crucial the
Commissioner can give you a flavor of
that certainly we've said before that as
this outbreak matures that the work of
the disease detectives will focus to
prioritize on identifying potential
outbreaks amongst healthcare workers
because again the the primary focus here
is to ensure the capacity of the
healthcare workforce and then also to
work to identify potential clusters in
nursing home facilities as well as
assisted living facilities okay all
right everybody thank you appreciate him
sir
we're we're in a new world together here
but hopefully we made this work together
today and we'll be giving you more
updates ortley thanks so much